!     path:      $Source: /storm/rc1/cvsroot/rc/rrtmg_sw/doc/release_notes.txt,v $
!     author:    $Author: mike $
!     revision:  $Revision: 1.9 $
!     created:   $Date: 2009/05/22 22:22:21 $
!------------------------------------------------------------------------

RRTMG_SW Release Notes

NOTE: ** CVS rtags can't accept "." in strings, substitute "_"


May 22, 2009:

	Release_3_8

        New option added to input absorption coefficient data either through 
        original source statements or through a netCDF data file. Choice of 
        input source is selected in the makefile. 

        Publicly released on AER RT web site in May 2009.

        - Added option for obtaining input absorption coefficient data either
          through a netCDF file or through the original source statements. 
          Global attributes of netCDF file header include detail on RRTM_SW
          source version of k-distribution data and water continuum version. 
        - Changed lower bound of allowable liquid droplet effective radius from
          1.5 to 2.5 microns for the inflag=2/liqflag=1 cloud input option.


February 9, 2009:

	Release_3_7

        Modified setting of the single scattering albedo threshold that selects
        between the general 2-stream scattering solution (for most SSA values)
        and a simpler, conservative scattering solution when SSA is close to 1.0.
        The new more restrictive threhold generates improved results within 
        multi-layer, highly scattering clouds when the SSA is just under one. 
        This change will affect fluxes and will significantly affect heating rates
        within highly scattering clouds, especially those that extend over multiple
        layers. Also made several changes that prevent exception problems under
        single precision.  A new flag was installed (idelm) that is used to
        select between either unscaled 'true' direct and diffuse fluxes or
        delta-scaled direct and diffuse fluxes.  Total fluxes continue to be
        provided as delta-scaled quantities only.  

        Publicly released on AER RT web site in February 2009.

        - Revised value of variable zwcrit in rrtmg_sw_reftra.f90 from 0.9995 to
          0.9999995.  This variable selects between the general 2-stream scattering
          solution and a conservative scattering solution that is used when the SSA 
          approaches 1.0.  The more restrictive threshold improves fluxes in heating
          rates in multi-layer, highly scattering clouds.  Results may also change
          slightly in other cloud or aerosol cases and may change negligibly due to 
          Rayleigh scattering in clear sky. 
        - Added flag idelm to GCM version of code to switch output direct and diffuse
          fluxes between delta-scaled and unscaled 'true' flux values.  The flag is
          set to 1 by default to output delta-scaled direct and diffuse fluxes in the
          GCM version of the code. Total fluxes continue to be output only as delta-
          scaled values. The idelm input flag in the column version of the code has 
          also been activated and is set to 0 by default to provide unscaled direct
          and diffuse fluxes.  See rrtmg_sw_instructions.txt for more information. 
        - Made several code changes in rrtmg_sw_reftra.f90 to prevent possible 
          divide by zero exception problems when the code is compiled with single
          precision.  
        - Removed an unnecessary module use association to module rrtmg_sw_cldprop
          in main module rrtmg_sw_rad. 
        - Converted declarations of arrays pref, prefd, ptra, and ptrad from 
          intent(out) to intent(inout) in module rrtmg_sw_reftra.f90.
        - Modified use associations related to rrsw_kgnn.f90 modules in source 
          files rrtmg_sw_taumol.f90 and rrtmg_sw_init.f90 for compatibility with
          gfortran and ifort compilers.  This has no affect on results. 
        - Added makefile in build directory for IBM XL platforms. 
        - Added a few updates to the file rrtmg_sw_instructions.txt. 


September 17, 2008:

        Release_3_61

        Modified input of ice particle effective size to require input of value
        appropriate for the selected ice optics parameterization. Previous scaling
        that was applied internally to convert ice effective radius to generalized
        effective size for the Fu parameterization has been removed.  Any necessary
        scaling needed to provide the proper ice particle size must be done before
        input to the radiation in the GCM version of the code.  This is consistent 
        with the input requirement for the column version of the model.  Note that
        the internal ice optics parameterizations are effective over specific ranges
        of particle size.  Results may be different from previous versions if the
        Fu parameterization is used in the GCM version of the code. 

        Publicly released on AER RT web site in September 2008.


August 29, 2008:

	Release_3_6

        Revised cloud property input to require in-cloud averaged cloud optical
        depth or in-cloud averaged cloud ice and liquid water paths in both the 
        single-column and gcm versions of the code. In earlier versions of the gcm
        code, input grid-averaged cloud properties were scaled by the cloud fraction
        internally to generate in-cloud averaged properties.  This change requires
        that this scaling be performed during the interfacing if necessary.  The
        minor structural modifications to the code have no effect on the results,
        though a minor change to the factor used to convert flux to heating rate
        will have a negligible effect on the heating rates. 

        Publicly released on AER RT web site in August 2008.

        - Added requirement that cloud properties be input as in-cloud averages
          rather than grid-averaged values in GCM code.
        - Renamed rrtmg_sw.f90 to rrtmg_sw_rad.f90 and renamed rrtmg_sw.nomcica.f90
          to rrtmg_sw_rad.nomcica.f90 for consistency between file names and
          module names. 
        - Replaced several 'where' statements with traditional loops in module
          mcica_subcol_gen_sw to improve computational performance on some systems.
        - Moved subroutine swcldpr, which contains cloud absorption coefficient
          data, from module rrtmg_sw_cldprop.f90 to rrtmg_sw_init.f90.
        - Removed unnecessary use association of module mcica_subcol_gen_sw
          from rrtmg_sw_rad.nomcica.f90. 
        - Revised definition and naming of integer and real kind type parameters. 
        - Changed setting of flag for selecting random number generator (irng) for
          McICA to make it a required input variable. Available options are kissvec 
          or Mersenne Twister.
        - Increased precision of heatfac by changing it from a hard-wired value to 
          a calculated value and changed code to require input of specific heat of 
          dry air into init module (rrtmg_sw_init.f90) for heatfac calculation.   
        - Oxygen volume mixing ratio was changed from a hard-wired parameter to
          a required input array. 
        - Forward scattering fraction was added as required input array when cloud
          optical properties are input directly (inflag=0 option).  This was 
          previously set as the square of the asymmetry parameter internally.
          This change was made to enhance the code flexibility to allow this value
          to be defined by the host GCM when cloud optical properties are provided.  
        - In the column version of the code, increased the number of digits required 
          to input variable solvar from INPUT_RRTM input file from three (f5.3) to
          five (f7.5) to improve code flexibility. 


January 3, 2008:

	Release_3_5

        Corrected calculation of cloud optical property stochastic arrays when
        cloud optical properties are input directly (inflgsw=0). Initialized
        asymmetry parameter to zero and single scattering albedo to one 
        uniformly throughout the code.  

        Publicly released on AER RT web site in January 2008.


September 9, 2007:

	Release_3_4

        Modified use of ice particle size variables rei/reicmc to utilize separate 
        variable names (dge/dgesmc) when units of generalized effective size are 
        required for iceflag=3 option. This allowed use of ice particle size in
        units of effective radius to parameterize cloud absorptivity using a basic
        approach when ice particle sizes are larger than the permitted range for
        the iceflag=3 option. Results may be minimally affected when ice particle
        sizes exceed 90 microns and iceflag=3 option is used. Also modified several
        local arrays in top-level subroutine module to accomodate an extra model 
        layer if this feature is utilized. 

        Publicly released on AER RT web site in September 2007.


September 4, 2007:

	Release_3_3

        Cleaned up use of column dimension in some arrays in top level module of 
        subroutine version of the model.  Also added solar constant (scon) as input 
        array in subroutine version of the model to allow scaling from default value
        in rrtmg_sw.  There was no impact on results from these changes in the column 
        version of the model.

        Publicly released on AER RT web site in September 2007.


August 29, 2007:

	Release_3_2

        Minor changes to makefile for AIX. Corrected use of variables icld 
        and nlay in top level source files for the subroutine version of code and
        for the McICA sub-column generator.  There was no impact on results from
        these changes in the column version of the model.

        Publicly released on AER RT web site in August 2007.


August 23, 2007:

	Release_3_1

        Made structural changes to modify code to use assumed-shape arrays
        rather than explicit-shape arrays throughout the model.  There was
        no impact on results from this changes.  Also implemented a 10000 
        point exponential lookup table for transmittance, similar to that
        used in the LW.  There were only negligible changes in results due
        to use of the lookup table. 

        Publicly released on AER RT web site in August 2007.

        - Converted explicit-shape arrays to assumed-shape arrays. 
        - Added exponential lookup table to improve computational performance.
        - Modified top level subroutine to a module and converted most of the
          other subroutines to modules.
        - Modified makefiles to clean up handling of compiled modules.
        - Added new makefile for AIX platforms.
        - Fixed calculation of pi and added calculation of pdp in modules 
          rrtmg_sw.f90 and rrtmg_sw.nomcica.f90, which did not affect the
          top level program for the column version of the model.
        - Added build directory for makefiles and doc directory for 
          documentation to main model directory for consistency with other
          AER RT model archives.  


April 17, 2007:

	Release_3_0

        Major source code format revisions and addition of McICA capability.

        Not publicly released. Released to Robert Pincus/NOAA on 18 April 2007
        and to Yu-Tai Hou/NCEP on 30 April 2007.

        - Reformatted entire model for consistency with RRTMG_LW to use modules
          and subroutine call array passing.  Excluded from the reformatting
          are files rrtatm.f, extra.f, and util_*.f, which are shared with and
          retain the formatting of RRTM_SW.
        - Code package can be used as a stand-alone column model or as a callable
          subroutine (such as in a GCM).
        - McICA capability has been added for stochastic representation of sub-grid
          cloud variability such as cloud fraction and cloud overlap.
        - Sub-column generator for McICA is called from within main source module
          in column mode, but it must be called prior to RRTMG_SW in GCM mode.
        - Installed two options for the random number generator required for 
          McICA (selected by changing the hard-wired flag irnd). 
        - Modified code to accept either cloud physical properties or cloud optical
          properties when using McICA.
        - Created makefiles consistent RRTMG_LW for SGI, SUN, LINUX (pgi) and 
          OS_X (g95) platforms.
       

October 21, 2005:

	Release_2_6_1 

        This version contains minor modifications to exclude
        an extraneous variable and to update the instructions file.

        This version was not publicly released.


August 4, 2005:

	Release_2_6 - This version contains modifications to include some
                of the updates added to RRTM_SW_V2.5 and RRTM_SW_V2.6.
                Release number raised to 2.6 for consistency with RRTM_SW.

		This version was not publicly released.

                * Improved cloud properties routine to:

                  a) include scattering properties of spheres, based on the
                     parameterization by Key et al. in the STREAMER v3.0 RT code.

                  b) convert cloud properties for Fu parameterization to a
                     finer grid.

                * Updated to rrtatm.f, which is compatible with lblatm.f CVS 
                  revision 9.3.

                * Increased number of significant digits in the net flux
                  output in OUTPUT_RRTM for the stand-alone version in
                  src file rrtmg_sw.F90.

                * Updated makefiles to compile with r8 and i8.  Modified 
                  F90-style integer type set in rrtmg_sw modules and source
                  files for consistency with i8.

                * Updated digits in value of PI to be consistent with rrtmg_lw. 
 
                * Changed CO2, N2O, and CH4 mixing ratio arrays to be dimensioned
                  on both longitude and layer in rrtmg_sw_112.F90, the callable 
                  subroutine version of RRTMG_SW for interfacing to a GCM. 
 
                * Added patent statement to each src file.


March 8, 2005:

	Release_2_3_1 - This version fixes a bug in the calculation
                of the total sky asymmetry parameter in file 
                rrtmg_sw_spcvrt.F90 when the routine cldprop is
                used to provide scaled cloud properties.  This only
                affected calculations that included both clouds and
                aerosols.

		This release was distributed to J.-J. Morcrette at ECMWF,
                Yu-Tai Hou at NCEP, Jimy Dudhia at NCAR, Dave Hogan
                for NPOESS applications, and it was provided to
                Tim Shippert (PNL) for BBHRP applications.


January 27, 2005:

	Release_2_3 - This version contains modifications to include 
                a bug fix related to delta scaling in cloudy profiles
                when cldprop is used and to add the capability of
                computed non-delta scaled direct and diffuse fluxes.

                1) Routine rrtmg_sw_spcvrt.F90 was modified to remove
                delta scaling in cloud profiles if subroutine cldprop
                was used to compute cloud properties and to apply scaling.

                2) Routines rrtmg_sw.F90 and rrtmg_sw_spcvrt.F90 were
                modified to output downward direct and diffuse fluxes.
                If not needed, this capability can be turned off to save 
                time by commenting code in rrtmg_sw_spcvrt.F90.

                3) Instruction manual was updated to specify that the 
                IDELM=0 option (unscaled "true" direct and diffuse flux)
                is the default and that the IDELM=1 option is not 
                available. 

		This release was distributed to J.-J. Morcrette at ECMWF,
                Yu-Tai Hou at NCEP, and Dave Hogan for NPOESS applications, 
                and it was distributed (in 224 g-point mode) to Tim Shippert 
                (PNL) for BBHRP applications.


December 15, 2004:

	Release_2_2 - This version contains modifications to include 
                some of the updates added to RRTM_SW V2.5 and includes
                a bug fix to module rrtmg_sw_spcvrt.F90.

                1) Changed module rdprof.f to accomodate updated version
                of rrtatm.f (that is shared with RRTM_SW).

                2) Added new solar variability option (ISOLVAR)

                3) Changed format statement in subroutine readaer to allow
                more than 4 aerosol layers (naer, format statement 9010).

                4) Updated instruction manual.

                5) Modified module rrtmg_sw_spcvrt.F90 to apply bug fix
                that adds delta-scaling to clear sky calculations, which
                has most significant impact in profiles with aerosols 
                having moderate to high optical depth. 

		This release was distributed to Yu-Tai Hou at NCEP, and 
                Dave Hogan for NPOESS applications.


November 24, 2004:

	Release_2_1 - This version contains minor bug fixes that affect
                the subroutine (GCM) version of the code only, including
                changing the parameter NMOL from 6 to 7 to include oxygen.  

		This release (in 224 g-point mode) was distributed to 
                Tim Shippert for BBHRP applications.


April 21, 2004:

	Release_2_0 - This version uses a reduced set of 112 g-points for
                improved computational efficiency.  Other minor modifications
                were also made to enhance performance.  The original 224
                g-point set can be restored by swapping code in one source
                file and two modules.  Two bug fixes were made to the source
                file rrtmg_sw_reftra.F90 to correct the computation of
                reflectivity and transmissivity in the presence of aerosols. 
                This fix was accomplished by restoring the syntax in this F90 
                version of the code to that used in the original F77 source.  
                An additional bug fix corrects the use of the parallel and
                direct components of the surface albedo, PALBP and PALBD.

		This release was distributed to Jimy Dudhia at NCAR for
		testing in their mesoscale model (MM5) and the Weather
		Research and Forecasting (WRF) model, to Yu-Tai Hou (NCEP)
                for testing in the GFS model, and to Kerry Emanuel (MIT). 

	
November 18, 2003:

	Release_1_1 - Includes two bug fixes that prevent execution of the
		code with a solar zenith angle of exactly zero (a small
		epsilon is substituted) and corrects variable assignments of
		the seperate diffuse and direct values of surface albedo.
		No reference

		This release was distributed to Jimy Dudhia at NCAR for
		testing in their mesoscale model (MM5) and the Weather
		Research and Forecasting (WRF) model.


October 17, 2003:

	RRTMG_SW is now being officially archived in CVS.  This code
	evolved from the standard RRTM_SW release, and it is intended for 
	application to GCMs. It includes modifications to replace DISORT 
	with a two-stream radiative transfer method, and the code has been 
	converted to F90 format.  Both a column version and callable 
	subroutine version of this code are archived.

	Release_1_0 - Initial release version.  This version uses only
		a two-stream radiative transfer method, and it uses the
                the full compliment of 224 g-points of the standard RRTM_SW.
		No reference

		This release was distributed to Ken Campana and Yu-Tai Hou
		(NCEP) for testing in their global forecast (GFS) model.
		The subroutine version was distributed to Kerry Emanuel (MIT) 
		for use in the MIT radiative-convective single column model.
                ECMWF did the conversion to F90 and added the 2-stream code
                starting from RRTM_SW_v2.4, and they are testing a version
                of this release in their forecast model. 
